Introduction
Research motivation
In the era of globalization, two most powerful weapons any business wants to have are flexibility and responsiveness to the changing and highly competitive environment (Wilson, 2010). Apparently, in addition to flexibility and responsiveness, any enterprise has struggled to make continuous enhancement in business operations in order to stay competitiveness in regard of costs, quality and delivery time. A compelling approach to attain those competitive features is the paradigm of lean production systems (LPS) which enable a company to transform itself into the zero-waste organization. Clearly, the term of LPS has been dominating in operations management, such as manufacturing industry and even service industry, and a majority of studies have concluded that the successful implementation of lean manufacturing systems creates advancing performances in comparison with those do not apply such manufacturing systems (Cua et al, 2001). That is a reason why many companies that have implemented a full or partial aspect of lean; however, others are still striving for implementing LPS, and some of them are in a group of enterprises in pharmaceutical industry. 
Facing the same phenomenon with other industries, the pharmaceutical companies have been confronting an increasing intensity of competition and under tremendous pressure to manage costs, which forces those companies to smoothen processes and sustain incremental improvements in their business operations (Jaiganesh et al, 2013). In order to survive in the market, the pharmaceutical enterprises have to enhance competitive advantages, including service level, flexibility, costs and quality (Saskia, 2014) while satisfying regulatory conditions and economic factors, such as R&D costs and post approval risks and returns, becoming more demanding (Henry, 2011). Lean production systems have been developed to eliminate waste, thereby enhancing operational efficiency and effectiveness in a manufacturing environment (Womack et al, 1990), so there is growing interest in it among companies in the pharmaceutical industry which is shaped by a majority of pharmaceutical small-medium enterprises (pSMEs) (Ralf, 2013). Implementing LPS is very crucial because it facilitates the possibility of pharmaceutical manufactures to satisfy a very basic cGMP requirement of all regulatory agencies, which is to demonstrate control and process capacity of the manufacturing processes (Smart, 2013). Having operated as small-medium sized enterprise that proved to be more responsive to the change toward lean production because of flexibility, entrepreneurial spirit and the innovation capabilities (Matt and Rauch, 2013) , pSMEs are able to adapt their production system into lean more robustly than pharmaceutical large and multi-national enterprises.
In fact, the pharma industry has slowly been deploying lean practices, in contrast to other industries that adopted it quite quickly and successfully (Katarina and Vojislav, 2012). This can be explained by the fact that pharmaceutical enterprises whose business size is small or medium, and normally lack essential resources for organizational, technological, and workforce-related changes towards LPS (Dombrowski et al, 2010) have to comply strictly with the principles of cGMP (Jaiganesh et al.,  2013).  Regardless of business size, implementing LPS in integration with pharma enterprises’ strategies while meeting all cGMP’s rules and requirements proves to be a challenge (Marianne et al, 2014). Some of the proven reasons for the failure in implementing LPS in general are lack of planning, methodology (Akhil, 2014), lack of resources such as workforce and finance (Ahmad, 2009), and inadequate understanding on selecting relevant lean tools (Pavnaskar, 2003). 
Because of those difficulties, several studies had been released to facilitate pharmaceutical enterprises to deploy LPS. Some of them introduced lean concepts in the cGMP environment proposed by Danel (2015), Adam et al. (2009), and Scott (2004) while Günther et al. (2012) pinpointed factors influencing on the success of LPS application. Lean practices applied in the pharmaceutical production were studied and assessed by Zubedi and Rahela (2014) whereas Anne and Dermot (2006) made a comparison between LPS and cGMP based on some areas, such as objectives and typical lean practices. 
Even though several research studies about LPS in pharmaceutical industry have been publicized, there is still a wide research gap in which the studies involving a practical step-by-step approach towards LPS for particularly pSMEs are limited. Hence, narrowing the gap is the main contribution into the body of knowledge.
Research objectives
The main objective is to facilitate pharmaceutical SMEs to deploy LPS by generating a company-specific implementation process that satisfies the needs of pSMEs and takes the special features of the pharmaceutical manufacturing environment, particularly current Good Manufacturing Practices. Along with the proposed LPS deployment process, customizable guides are also developed.  To achieve the objective, the following tasks need to be completed:
 To review and scrutinize lean deployment initiatives proposed by the literature
 To examine the relationship between LPS and cGMP 
 To highlight influencing factors affecting on applying LPS 
 To propose a company-specific implementation process of LPS for pSMEs
 To customize guidelines containing special features of pSMEs and considering the influencing factors. 
Research methodology
In order to achieve research objectives developed in the first part, a literature-based research approach was deployed and illustrated by Figure 1.
To elaborate the proposed research methodology, the following detailed explanations are provided: 
 Research objectives are presented in the introduction section in which an overview of the research motivation, the research background and research gap are included, and research methods are used to achieve the research objectives.
 For literature review and analysis distributed in the chapter 2: 
The purpose of this step is to capture the current stage of scientific knowledge of LPS implementation by taking advantage of electronic databases. The relevant publications were filtered based on the combinations of key words as described by the table below: 
Databases employedKeywords: Group 1Keywords: Group 2Keywords: Group 3Google
Google Scholar
ResearchGate
Book publications
Elseiver
Academic scholarly Journals
Master theses
Doctoral thesesLeanSMEsPharmaceutical industryLean implementationSmall-medium sized enterprisesPharmaceutical SMEsInfluencing factors on lean implementationLean tools, lean methods, lean practicesTable 1: Key words for searching relevant publications [Own design]

Detail Investigation: The step is to scrutinize the abstracts, keywords and critical relevant contents of the selected articles. Each selected paper relevant to the research questions was searched, comprehended, analysed, synthesized and evaluated in three main contents (lean implementation initiatives, influencing factors, and lean practices) categorized in two main groups (general industry and pharmaceutical SMEs). The whole results of literature review process were summarized in the section of appendices.

Figure 1: Research methodology flowchart [Own design]


As a result of reviewing the selected research papers, lean principles and practices were tabulated in a form of comparison among the papers. Besides, lean influencing factors proposed by the literature, including success factors and barriers, were also graphically visualized to infer the most concerned critical factors on the success of lean journey.
When it comes to existing lean implementation models, an in-depth study into 21 reviewed research papers on lean implementation initiatives was conducted to figure out the critical steps that boost and ensure the success of lean deployment journey. 
 The next chapter is to present a literature-based process of lean implementation that overcomes the limitations of existing lean deployment initiatives. The expected final outcome is to configure the proposed process to be applicable in pharmaceutical SMEs. The proposed process also takes into account the special features of pSMEs, manufacturing in cGMP, and integrates lean practices associated with the process as well as success factors and barriers. This chapter ends in providing guidelines for lean deployment.
 The final chapter summarizes the research contributions into the body of knowledge as well as practical applications. Implications for the future research are included in this chapter.


State of scientific knowledge
 
Lean production systems
An introduction to lean manufacturing systems
In 1988, the article named “Triumph of the Lean Production System” written by John (1988) was published to bring a common myth about the automotive industry: Plants operating with a “lean” production system are able to produce a wide range of products while maintaining high levels of quality and productivity. For the next two years, Shingo (1989) and Womack et al. (1990) revealed a critical reason behind the rise of lean production systems that are simple die-change techniques, which enhance flexibility of small batch production eliminating cost of huge inventories and the waste of large number of defective parts. Those ideas opened a massive number of publications on lean manufacturing, which led to several definitions of lean as follow:
Verein Deutscher Ingenieure-VDI (2012): LPS is an enterprise-specific, methodical system of rules for comprehensive and continuous designing of enterprise processes.
Smart (2013): “It is a culture which emphasizes taking the waste out of every aspect of the operations including the supply chain, manufacturing, laboratory, distribution, quality and regulatory compliance” 
Wilson (2010): Taiichi Ohno, the chief engineer of TPS, says “The basis of the Toyota Production system is the absolute elimination of waste.”
Taken together, the definition of lean could be written as “Lean is a series of cultural and problem-solving methods for driving enterprise processes toward zero-waste processes.”
In addition to the definitions, Craig and Bas (2009) sketched the following “lean thinking house” diagram which shows major parts of LPS, one of which is the top of the house indicating values as the goal of lean. Based on the foundation of management support, the goal can be touched by the two pillars including “respect for people” and “continuous improvement” in compliance with 14 lean principles and the usage of development practices.


Figure 2: The house of lean [Leffingwell, LLC., 2009]
Originating in automotive industry, LPS have been applied by a wide range of industry, such as process industry (Floyd, 2010), technology transfer management (Alena, 2016) and even construction (Salem et al. 2006). Apparently, lean comes to pharmaceutical industry.
Lean for pharmaceutical industry
Increasing market consolidation, growing technology parity, declining in industry growth	 in combination with the rises of generics are drivers for increasing competition in pharmaceutical industry (Friedli et al., 2006), which in turn is a catalyst for increasing need of adapting lean manufacturing into the pharmaceutical industry. However, the pharmaceutical industry, manufacturing in a cGMP environment, has been slow to adopt lean manufacturing systems (Anne et al., 2006). Generally, the regulated industry has hardly applied such innovative systems into the manufacturing operations for several reasons. Regulatory	uncertainty is one of the impeding factor which raises the perception of pharma enterprises that their existing regulatory systems are dense and undesirable to implement such systems. Besides, the special and technical inherent issues in the industry have been emerged as a potential reason for the discouragement (Guideline for industry PAT, 2004). 
Nevertheless, the targets of cGMP and lean manufacturing systems are not contradictory, but complementary due to the fact that the cGMP focus on manufacturing as a mean to produce safe and effective products for the patient while lean concentrates on manufacturing as a location for improvement and value creation from a customer’s perspective. This was concluded by Anne (2006) and his colleagues who tabulated a comparison of cGMP with lean manufacturing as the table below:
AreacGPMLean manufacturingTargets Ensure product effectiveness
 Prevent harm Reduce waste
 Create valueFocus Product development
 Manufacturing and quality assurance Value streamApproach to manufacturing Quality first
 Regulated and prudent Quality balanced with productivity
 Continuous and simultaneousTypical goals Follow validated process
 Prevent deviation Reduce cost
 Improve quality
 Decrease cycle time
 Reduce inventory
 Improve deliveryTypical tools Documentation
 Personnel qualifications and training
 Cleanliness
 Validation and qualification
 Compliant review
 Audits
 Value stream mapping
 Kaizen improvement
 Error proofing
 Moving to pull
 Simple flow
 Training
 Quality function developmentTable 2: A comparison of lean and cGMP manufacturing [Anne, 2006]
As can be seen by the table, lean’s original objectives are to eliminate waste and to create value, while the cGMP’s objectives are to ensure that controls are in place to deliver safe and effective medicinal products. Agreeing with Anne (2006), Zubedi (2014) stated the cGMP stress on quality products whereas lean Implementation focuses on increasing productivity by waste reduction. The objectives of LPS supplement to that of cGMP. Therefore, they can be integrated to produce effective pharmaceutical products with efficient manufacturing operations. For further clarification, some inherent characteristics of production in cGMP environment that can be improved by LPS are clarified as follow:
Manufacturing process: Pharmaceutical production processes are typically  operated by a series of unit operations and sequencial activities requiring careful balancing and maintaining flows to avoid waste, such as built-up inventory and waiting time (Smart, 2013). Moreover, the batch production method is inherent in cGMP to prevent cross-contamination (Anne, 2006), which in turn basically causes interruption in production. In the lean pharma production line, a continuous program is required to reduce batch size and queues to avoid the inefficiency and variability while avoiding regulatory violations.
Tools: The process understanding of scientific, risk-managed pharmaceutical development, production management and quality assurance is very crucial and can be facilitated by a set of lean techniques, such as process control, continuous improvement and multivariate analysis (Guideline for industry PAT, 2004).
Standardization:  One of the prominent characteristics of cGMP is the vast number of documented processes in terms of technical specifications and standards. Nevertheless, operational procedures are normally insufficient detail, which results in variations in operational processing steps. The situation is different to lean pharma environment where every step needs to be standardized and documented in terms of not only technical aspects, but sequence, required inventory level, and processing time so that the variations with respect to time and output can be measured.  
In fact, several successful applications of LPS implementation were made. For example, Elbermawy et al., (2014) applied Lean in combination with Six Sigma to enhance the supply chain process in pharmaceutical industry with emphasis on the usage of value stream mapping to reduce the cause of defects and eliminate non-value added processes. Moreover, Maria et al., (2014) reported a tremendous improvement in lead time and work-in-process level of a pharmaceutical company by re-engineering a batch production to a pull-based production system. Nonetheless, none of them shows any model of LPS implementation for pharmaceutical industry with exception of the operational excellence (OPEX) reference model proposed by Friedli et al., (2010). However, the following reference model indicates elements of LPS adapted for the pharmaceutical industry, but does show a general approach instead of a step-by-step lean implementation process.

Figure 3: OPEX reference model [Friedli et al., 2010]
Lean for SMEs
A small-medium sized enterprise is defined by the European Commission as having less than 250 persons, an annual turnover not exceeding EUR 50 million, and/or an annual balance sheet total not exceeding EUR 43 million (Concerning the definition, 2003). Global trade and state-of-the-art technologies have made the world smaller, which in turn puts any entity in pressure and tough competition in the market place in which SMEs are crucial contributors in the economic development (Matt and Rauch, 2013), but have vulnerable competitive positions (Pius et al., 2006). 
To take advantages in the global competitive marketplace, the SMEs have struggled for getting world glass performance through the implementation of lean production (Ahmad et al., 2009). Achanga et al. 2006 indicated that the implementation of lean has been succeeded in many large organizations but there are still less documented evidences of its implementation in SMEs (as cited by Ahmad et al., 2009). Antony and Kumar (2005) made one of the research papers showing the comprehensive investigation of key strengths and weaknesses of SMEs in terms of initiating an improvement program as described by the following table. The table shows SMEs are capable of adapting lean to enhance the competitive advantages even though there are still barriers impeding the deployment of LPS. The deployment of lean projects requires the proper effort of planning prior to the implementation to avoid the vicious waste, which normally is ignored by the SMEs.

SEMs’ strengthsSMEs’ weaknessesBe flexible and hence changes can be introduced fairly quicklyLow degree of standardization and formalizationLoose and informal working relationshipsLikely to deploy improvements quickly and gain rapid benefitsFocus on operational matters rather than planningLack of strategic planning and inspiring visionRapid execution and implementation of decisionsResponsible for many facets of the business and many decisions. Decisions are generally made for short-term profitabilityFormation of strategy process is intuitive rather than analyticalTop management is highly visible and hence provides leadership by exampleThere are chances that management lays off employees when the work becomes superfluous. This makes SMEs work harder to retain high caliber staff.Tend to have high employee loyaltyFlat with few layers of management and fewer departmental interfacesAdamant and dictatorial nature of owner can damage new initiativesAbsence of bureaucracy in management teamsManagers and operatives are more likely to be directly involved with the customersMore responsive to market needs and more innovative in their ability to meet customers’ demandTraining is likely to be focusedLack of skills, time and resources; no specified training budgetExtent of training and staff development in SMEs are limited and informalNo incentive or reward programs in many cases due to budget and resources constraintsCulture of learning and change rather than controlIncidence of “gut feeling” decisions more
prevalent; often operate in a fire-fighting mode for survivalPeople orientedNot systems orientedLimited investment in ITTable 3: SMEs' strengths and weaknesses [Antony and Kumar, 2005]
Most of SMEs fear that the implementation may force them to spend a lot of financial investment on improvement operations, such as training and staff recruitment, and working time. Due to budget and resources constraints, they even do not want to hire a qualified consultant who plays an important role in driving an enterprise towards lean in the best way. However, SMEs have inherent characteristics to configure the LPS, which is successfully applied by the larger companies, to suit their business. The managers in SMEs are normally capable of marking changes more quickly than larger enterprises due to flexibility, less bureaucracy in the management team, few lines of management and department communications. 
Based on the above analysis, it is conceivable to conclude that LPS is compatible with SMEs in general and pSMEs in particular, but the implementation of LPS needs to be configured properly to ensure the success of lean transformation in pSMEs.
Lean principles and practices
The goal of lean manufacturing system is to eliminate wastes, enhance flexibility to customer demand, which in turn increases the efficiency and effectiveness in operations. In order to achieve the goal, lean principles, methods and tools need to be comprehended and applied properly through the path of lean implementation. 
Lean principles are a set of rules that needs to be complied to go on continuously a journey toward lean; however, they are identified in various ways by different authors, as demonstrated by Table 4. 
In summary, 9 typical lean principles on which LPS operates are determined as below:
 Identification of values
 Zero defect
 Standardization
 Flow principle
 Pull principle
 Continuous improvement philosophy
 Employee orientation and management by objectives
 Visual management
 Avoidance of waste
Getting along with lean principles, lean practices are significantly prerequisite for the success of lean journey. Every manufacturing industry that has been trying to get ‘lean’ with a headlong rush to become lean also resulted in many misapplications of existing lean manufacturing tools often due to inadequate understanding of the purpose of tools (Pavnaskar, 2003). Additionally, the misapplication can be worse when one ignores the fact that lean production methods and instruments are not equally applicable to large and small companies (Matt and Rauch, 2013). For example, concrete methods, like Six Sigma, qualify function development or simulation software, are only recommendable for large organizations because of the fact that the complexity and effort for the implementation are only suitable for those have enough resources.
Liker (2004)VDI (2012)Womack and Jones (2003)Specify “value” by specific productBuild a culture of stopping to fix problems, to get quality right the first timeZero-defectStandardized tasks are the foundation for continuous improvement and employee empowermentStandardizationCreate continuous process flows to bring problems to the surfaceFlow principleIdentify the “value stream” for each product,Level out the workload (heijunka)Make the value “flow” without interruptions,Use "pull" systems to avoid overproductionPull principleActivating the demand pull by synchronizing customer demand and information flowsBecome a learning organization through relentless reflection (hansei) and continuous improvement (kaizen)Continuous improvement processPursue perfectionBase your management decisions on a long-term philosophy, even at the expense of short-term financial goalsEmployee orientation and management by objectivesGrow leaders who thoroughly understand the work, live the philosophy, and teach it to othersDevelop exceptional people and teams who follow your company's philosophy.Respect your extended network of partners and suppliers by challenging them and helping them improve.Make decisions slowly by consensus, thoroughly considering all options; implement decisions rapidlyUse visual control so no problems are hidden.Visual managementGo and see for yourself to thoroughly understand the situation (genchi genbutsu).Use only reliable, thoroughly tested technology that serves your people and processes.Avoidance of wasteTable 4: Lean principles [Liker (2014), VDI (2012), Workmack and Jones (2003)] 
When it comes to SMEs, Rose et al. (2011) recommended that SEMs should apply practices that require least financial investment and are feasible to apply, such as 5S, visual control and display, standardization, statistical process control and quality circle. The practice of Kanban & small lot sizes can be implemented as long as the production flow is efficiently run, with minimum machine breakdown, quality problems and parts shortage. Besides, Dombrowski (2010) recommended that kaizen and total quality management are difficult to implement without excessive effort because they require knowledge and experience about the processes of the SMEs. Thomas (2006) supported the research outcome of Rose (2011) based on his study on application of lean tools in healthcare. He suggested that 5S, visual control, and standard work should be applied early to launch lean transformation because they are simple, but effective. 
Type of enterpriseTarget dimensionsGeneralSMEsSMEsSMEsPhamarPhamarQualityCostTimePrincipleMethodMatt (2013)Ahmad (2009)Rose (2011)Marianne
(2014)Smart
(2013)Standardisation5SVVVVV+++++Process standardisationVVVV++++++++Zero defects5x WhyV++++++8D report++++++A3 method++++++Autonomation V+++++++Ishikawa diagramV++++++Short control loopsV+++++Poka yokeV+++++++Six sigmaVV+++++++Statistical process control+++++Work self-checkV++++++Visual managementAndonVV++++++Shop floor managementVV+++++++++Continuous improvementAudit ++++++Benchmarking V++++++Cardboard engineer++++++Idea management+++++++++PDCAV++++++People objectivesHancho+++++++Target management++++++Flow principlesFirst in first outV++++One piece flowV+++++++++Quick change overVVVV++++++Value stream mappingVV++++++U layoutV+++++Pull principleJust in timeVV+++++Kanban VVV+++++++Milk run+++++Levelling V++++Supermarket+++++Avoidance of wasteChaku Chaku+++++Low cost automationV++++++TPMVVVV+++++Waste analysisV++++++Table 5: List of lean methods associated with principles [Matt (2013), Ahmad (2009), Rose (2011), Marianne (2014), Smart (2013) and VDI (2012)]

For pharmaceutical industry which is characterized by the cGMP requirements, some of these lean tools are applicable in the production cycle, but others are not adopted very well. For instance, standardization is among the tools the most used and Just-in-time is the tool that employees are not implementing fully due to lots of documentations and delays in the cGMP process (Marianne et al., 2014). Instead of comparing the applicability among lean practices, Smart (2013) showed typical lean tools which are applicable to the pharmaceutical manufacturing processes, two of which are 5S and standardization, and emphasized on the value stream mapping adapting Lean to biopharmaceutical manufacturing processes
A set of systematic lean tools found in VDI (2012) in combination with recommendations on the lean tool usage for SMEs of Matt (2013), Ahmad et al. (2009), and Rose et al. (2011), and for pharmaceutical production of Marianne (2014) and Smart (2013) is summarized and compared as the table above (Table 5).
In summary, the usage of a lean method and tool should put thorough consideration on different scenarios, such as the type of industry, available resources, and lean target dimensions, in order to avoid misapplications leading to vicious waste.
Lean implementation initiatives
Lean implementation models
After the fall of mass production, the rise of lean production began holistically in Toyota under the name of Toyota Production System (TPS) by the early 1960s (Womack et al., 1990). With miraculous successes of Japanese manufacturers, the MIT International Vehicle Program studied TPS which they called “Lean Production System” (John, 1988). Lot of literature with respects to the lean benefits and its practical applications have been released for not only the automotive industry and other industries, but even intangible areas such as technology transfer among companies (Alena, 2016). LPS can bring less process waste, short lead time, less rework, financial savings, less inventory, which in turn makes lean enterprises more responsiveness and flexibility to the dynamic market (Melton, 2005 and Wilson, 2010). However, Azharul and Kazi (2013) mentioned that not all lean implementations have produced such results. They also made a reference of Behrouzi and Wong (2011) who stated that the lack of an effective implementation methodology is a significant reason behind the failure of the lean implementation.
Because of that, several scientific research papers for building LPS in a variety of industries have been published, one of which is a roadmap of four phases including nine specific steps for carrying out LPS (Dombrowski et al., 2014). They suggested that the first phase begins with basic planning in which awareness of necessity and the current state of lean implementation must be prioritized, and then lean deployment master planning is made.  They also emphasized that the pilot project, which is likely remarkably successful, needs to be executed with organizational changes and daily continuous improvements in agreement with LPS implementation detailed planning. Having the same opinion as Dombrowski and his colleagues, Wilson (2010) did stress on system-wide evaluation of the current manufacturing system as well as educational level of workforce.
When it comes to a specific level of detail, Wright (2008) specified a 20-step road map of lean manufacturing deployment that also shows the importance of awareness of LPS as well as repeats the step of determination of the gap between current state and a state of lean as Dombrowski et al. (2014) mentioned. Furthermore, he demonstrated the plausible existence of communication and feedback channel for involved personnel is very crucial for success. Besides, he showed that training all employees about lean overviews, eight wastes, standard operations, etc. must be included in the lean journey so that a set of lean tools in logical sequences can be applied properly. With great detail of lean implementation steps, Valles and Sanchez (2011) listed elaborate deployment steps in order and classified those steps into five phases comprising Plan, Apply, Deploy, Integration and Excel. The authors not only focused on the sequential arrangement of lean tools for internal implementation, but also recommended for developing supplier programs. Noticeably, they spent a lot of words for highlighting the necessity of communication and feedback means, such as publishing and posting results of improvement activities, during lean implementation. Unlike the mentioned research papers, Harbour (2012) sketched the stages for lean manufacturing, beginning with organizational development as a foundation to discipline building on which lean tools are executed, and ending at continuous improvement and collaboration. 
According to Institute of Industrial Engineering (n.d), the stages of preparation for lean implementation need to be thoroughly prepared in prior to the success of lean deployment. The first stage should be awareness of lean from which lean vision can be developed by harnessing value stream mapping or design. Some typical lean tools are also included in the stage of preparation of processes of lean, such as 5S as a basic must-applied lean tool. When all those steps are properly conducted, the start of lean journey will begin with guidelines for supporting lean manufacturing and 3P (Production Preparation Process). Not only focusing on the process of preparation, but VDI (2012) recommended three phases (Planning, Development, and Audit) for lean implementation phase in which the group of authors showed the necessity of planning, information for external organizations in terms of lean implementation, motivation systems, pilot projects and  especially a system audit.
Based on lean principles, Azharul et al. (2013) developed a framework of lean implementation through five lean principles, specifically value proposition, value stream, flow, pull and pursue perfection. The value proposition phase is to evaluate the existence of lean culture and the current state of system from which the lean teams are formed to fill the gap toward lean system. He and his colleagues also emphasized on key performance indicators for measuring the progress of lean improvement activities in the phase of value stream. Besides, Wong and Wong (2011) adapted lean principles to make up lean manufacturing implementation framework in which lean principles are considered as a foundation for the success of lean deployment. Moreover, stability, standardization, and discipline are defined as prerequisites to implement lean manufacturing. They made final contribution in their research by determining 13 key areas for continuous improvement activities, such as material handling, work processes, inventory, safety and ergonomics, layout, and equipment, just to name a few. 
In addition to lean initiatives built on lean principles, there are some quantitative techniques used to build lean implementation models. One of the popular quantitative techniques is an Interpretive Structural Modelling (ISM). Jagdish et al. (2014) developed a framework of sustainable lean implementation made of lean practice bundles with a methodology of ISM. They stated that the human resource management, a lean practice bundle (including culture development, employee development, labour relations, motivation, and communication), is a base of lean implementation framework. Their study resulted that the low cost practice bundle (including JIT purchase, Kanban, Inventory reduction) is a bottom line of the framework.  Having similar approach to Jagdish and his colleagues, Naveen et al. (2013) and Jadhav et al. (2013) reported the consistence results stating that human factors and communication, feedback systems are very crucial to be considered as a solid base of lean implementation journey.
Additionally, LSP can be implemented regardless of business sizes, even though SMEs have some advantages as well as difficulties over large enterprises. Specifically, SMEs are flexible to change themselves towards lean but low degree of standardization; furthermore, they have thin layers of management but they emphasize too much on operational matters than planning (Ahmad, 2009, and Matt and Rauch, 2013). Because of the increasing need and challenges of SMEs in lean application, the realization of LPS in SMEs has been appealing to many researchers about not only identifying the barriers (Akhil, 2014, Yang 2010, and Bakås, 2011) and success factors (Bakås, 2011, Pius, 2006, and Timans, 2012), but providing guidelines for transitioning to lean (Bozdogan, 2000).
It is also proven that the proposed lean deployment initiatives can be adapted and configured to create a company-specific LPS implementation model (Dombrowski et al, 2010) as long as the enterprises perceive the need for change and manage it towards lean enterprises (Riitta, 1994 and Norani, 2003). According to The Lean Guide (n.d), the process of lean implementation adapted to wine production can be divided into four phases, beginning with lean thinking by which wastes in the production processes are identified, to implementation of waste eliminating practices, and ending at redesigning production flows in accordance with lean system. Maxel (n.d) adapted the available lean implementation plans to make an eight-step process of lean deployment in distribution. He highlighted the importance of training, commitment by management, and communication system during lean execution. Even in technology transfer projects, Alena (2016) comprehended several lean initiatives, one of the main reference was Sherif et al. (2013), and developed a framework of lean management implementation in the horizontal technology transfer projects with new emphasis on the involvement of lean experts, documentation of lean lessons, evaluation systems. Apparently, this also happens in pharmaceutical manufacturing, which was concluded by Friedli et al. (2006) whose research results indicate that most of lean principles of Toyota production systems also work in the pharmaceutical industry. 
Therefore, those available lean implementation initiatives, which are listed on the appendix A, can be adapted to develop the company-specific lean deployment process for pSMEs as the main research objective. 
Critical steps of lean implementation process
Based on the above reviewed research papers, it can be concluded that there are many different lean implementation models proposed by different authors, but they emphasize similarly on some critical steps of lean deployment regardless of industry and size. To make it clear, the typical lean deployment plans proposed by Wilson (2010), The Lean Guide (n.d), Maxel (n.d), Wright (2008), Azharul et al. (2013), Sherif et al. (2013), and VDI (2012) were adapted and illustrated by Figure 4. 
The figure illustrates different coloured paths in order to implement LPS from the sources represented by the authors to specific sequential steps. For instance, Sherif et al. (2013) proposed the starting point of lean execution is to have lean experts, known as Sensei (Wilson, 2010), who are rich in experience in making sure the path toward LPS is not only logical, but the best way for a particular distinct enterprise scenario. In contrast, Azharul et al. (2013) suggested the first step is to define the system, which was also the second step of lean implementation process proposed by Sherif et al. (2013).  Cultural evaluation is the second step after system definition proposed by Azharul et al. (2013), but also the first step of Wilson (2010), and Maxel (n.d)’s lean deployment model. The remaining sequential steps can be seen by Figure 4 which also points out critical steps of a lean implementation process. Some of them are lean training and communication system, suggested by 4 out of 7 research papers, which need to be included in the successful journey of LPS implementation. Hence, even though different authors proposed different implementation models for concert situations, but those models have some similar critical steps. 
Applying the same scrutinizing process of the figure, the comprehensive list of critical implementation steps, which are associated with lean implementation initiatives proposed by the literature, is tabulated by Table 6 and detailed as below:   
Lean understanding (S1): an understanding of LPS advantages and need in lean deployment. The understanding helps to avoid unnecessary confusion which will accelerate the likelihood of failure (Smart, 2013). Finding out the success stories as well as pros and cons of LPS typically necessitates to begin in the first phase of lean deployment (Dombrowski et al., 2014).
Expert lean team (S2): the harness of external experienced lean practitioners or consultants and internal problem-solving talents to manage and provide guidelines for the lean implementation journey. According to Wilson (2010), one of three fundamental issues to lean transformation is problem solving talents who are vital catalysts to the success of journey. Besides, hiring qualified consultants or Sensei will head for quick wins in improvement projects and ensure the best way leading to lean is identified (Friedli et al., 2006).
Enterprise evaluation (S3): an assessment of the current state of an enterprise, which helps to pinpoint the gap between the as-is and to-be situation. Specifically, strengths and weaknesses to apply lean in terms of workforce, resources, leadership support and commitment need to be identified (Wilson, 2010). The external factors, such as markets, competitors, suppliers and customers necessitate to be analysed (Dombrowski et al., 2014) . 



Figure 4: Lean implementation roadmaps [Own design based on The Lean guide (n.d), Wilson (2010), Maxel (n.d), Wright (2008), Azharul (2011), Sherif (2013) and VDI (2012)]
Literature ReviewIndustryCritical stepsS1S2S3S4S5S6S7S8S9S10Wilson, 2010General++++ +++++Valles-Chavez and Sanchez, 2011General+ ++++++++Harbour, 2012General +  + +  +Wright, 2008General + ++ +  +Lean Implementation Tools, n.dGeneral+ +     + Dombrowski et al., 2014General++++++ +++VDI, 2012General   ++++ + Sherif et al., 2013General ++++ ++++Azharul and Kazi 2013General +++  + ++Jagdish et al., 2014General + ++ + ++Naveen et al., 2013General++ ++ +   Jadhav et al., 2013General + ++ +  +Riitta 1994General+ ++++++++Norani 2003General+   ++ +++The lean guide, n.dOther+     +  +Maxel, n.dOther ++++++  +Wong and Wong 2011Other+  +  +  +Alena 2016Other ++++ ++++Smart, 2013Pharma++++++++++Friedli 2006Pharma +   ++  +Dombrowski et al., 2010SMEs++++++ +++Sum1114111615101791318Percentage in Total number of 21 reviewed papers52%67%52%76%71%48%81%43%62%86%Table 6: Summary of literature review on critical steps of lean implementation steps [Own design]

Training programs (S4): comprehensive programs of conveying knowledge on lean to execution teams and all relevant personnel. Ningombam et al., (2013) highlighted the lack of training is one of the dangerous barriers to lean transformation because it leads to lack of skills and lean knowledge. Therefore, the enterprises should emphasize effective lean-related education and training programs and then conduct training assessments to measure the training efficiency (Sherif et al., 2013).
Communication and feedback system (S5): a mechanism of information flow involving LPS implementation through the entire enterprise. The flow of information plays a crucial role in enabling staff that have unequal levels of knowledge to have the same language in day-to-day learning and communication (Yang, 2010). Besides, a good platform of communication and feedback will help to cope with the impeding factors, such as internal resistance, insufficient resources and lack of leadership (Timans, 2012). 
Improvement projects (S6): a series of lean projects carried out for marking improvements. During the execution of those projects, the lean teams have chances to test lean methods and tools in the selected sectors of an enterprise (Dombrowski et al., 2010). Noticeably, pilot project launches would give room for learning from the unpredicted events and prepare for the roll-out in a mass scale of application (Friedli et al., 2010). The success of these projects will enhance the employees’ morale and increase their confidence in application.
Kaizen practices (S7): methods and tools for LPS implementation. The misapplication of lean methods is dangerous in creating more wastage of resources in terms of time and money (Pavnaskar et al., 2003). Therefore, choosing the right lean methods and tools associated with designed targets is very critical in the deployment process.
Lean documentation and standardization (S8): pieces of paper or even better digital databases containing lean activities structured in a systematic way. According to Riitta (1994), the enterprise should have careful documentation – both qualitative and quantitative – of the change processes to gain generalizable results from these real-life experiments in improvement activities. Previous implementation projects are worth documenting as lessons on keeping data, information and eventually knowledge for the future (Sherif et al., 2013)
Performance measurement system (S9): a series of key performance indicators measuring how well the performance targets are met.  Azharul and Kazi (2013) strongly stressed on the performance measurements as a major part of their lean implementation proposal. The measurements on the current state of the process in terms of productivity, efficiency and effectiveness, value-added ratio, defect rate and other lean assessment metrics are crucial for keeping track of lean progress.
Lean sustaining (S10): long-term sustainability of lean activities and performances. Lean is a long journey that require a lot of effort and resources, so it is really important to recognize and maintain it (Smart, 2013). Moreover, Improvements as continuity are inherently designed to be sustainable and maintained overtime (Friedli et al., 2013).
As can be seen by Table 6, the lean implementation initiatives proposed by the literature are not consistent in terms of implementation steps. For example, the model proposed by Wilson (2010) does not show a communication and feedback system (S5) as a step of the journey to LPS while Dombrowski et al., (2014) proposed sufficient phases and steps, but did not specify specific lean methods or kaizen tools. Smart (2013) developed a lean bio-manufacturing approach which includes all mentioned critical steps; however, it was not built on a sequential structured process.
Therefore, this literature-based research aims for developing a lean implementation process that overcomes the limitations of the existing lean implementation models.
Phase model of lean production system 
Normally, it is very understandable to assign the implementation steps in structural and sequential phases of whole journey of lean implementation. However, the terms and boundary of phases are not absolutely clear. For instance, Sherif et al., (2013) introduced a model of four phases, including conception, implementation, transformation, monitoring and controlling. The implementation phase is executed by the completion of major activities comprising lean planning, team establishment, and current state assessment, pilot project execution and evaluation. In contrast, Dombrowski et al., (2014) also came up with a detailed model of four phases, including basic planning, setting up in which the lean teams and communication flows are underlined, rollout, and daily operations. The rollout phase is made of pilot project implementation, evaluation and documentation. 
Another interpretation of lean phases based on VDI (2012) is four focused phases of LPS and each phase focuses on some areas of activities as detailed below:
Conception phase: the involvement of strategic levels of management teams and important stakeholders in planning strategic goals and conducting large-scale external and internal evaluations of business is stressed.
Implementation phase: this phase concentrates on the activities of internal evaluation, ranging from workforce qualifications to attributes of manufacturing systems, and the operational planning and execution.
Transition phase: process reviews on strategic targets and necessary adjustments of corporate structures and systems for continuous improvement are critical outcomes of this phase.
Operation phase: sustaining the improvement activities and maintaining the target achievements are specially designed for the final phase of LPS.
Taken altogether, the scope of lean implementation phase should focus on establishing lean teams associated with communication and feedback flows, internal evaluations, kaizen projects, implementation evaluation and documentation. The proposed phases of the lean implementation process in which the 10 critical steps are properly assigned include planning, supporting system, execution, post execution, and lean sustaining as interpreted in the section 3.
Influencing factors on lean implementation
Marvel and Standridge (2009) stated that incorrect application of lean systems leads to waste of the organizational resources and reduction in employees’ confidence in practicing lean. Even with the aids of several available lean implementation initiatives, Anvari et al., (2010) revealed that some enterprises have confronted challenges to apply lean by using some of the lean initiatives (as cited in Sherif et al., 2013).  Taleghani (2010) indicated that all obstacles such as executive, culture, management, technical and implementation issues are considered as organizational challenges in the path of the lean deployment process. Nordin N. & Deros B. (2013) concluded that lean implementation is a systematic and continual effort; therefore, it is important to identify and comprehend the barriers as well as success factors for the smooth transition (as cited in Akhil, 2014).
By conducting holistically the 30 research papers, the comprehensive illustration of the influencing factors on the success of lean implementation is sketched and summarized in the appendix B. Some of the research papers provided both lean success factors and barriers, the other studied deeply on one of them. Timans (2012), Ahmad (2009), and Prasanth (2015)  found the most influencing factors, specifically 23, 23 and 21 factors respectively. In contrast, some authors just pointed out the major critical factors as they found during their research. For instant, Pavnaskar (2003), who produced the classification scheme of lean practices, stressed only on the failure of lean implementation due to misapplication on lean tools. 
The text mining was conducted by combining all concerned factors suggested by the literature to search for the critical success factors and barriers on the lean implementation. This paper hypothesized that the most critical one is the one which was mentioned the most across the literature.
Lean barriers
Lean barriers are anything that prevents the success of LPS implementation. There are total 44 lean barriers found by the reviewed research papers. Some of them were detected more than four times in the literature, the other were mentioned as the second time or even as new discoveries, such as political instability (Danel B., 2015). The whole portrait of lean barriers is described by the following bar chart:

Figure 5: Lean barriers-Statistics [Own design]

 Lack of knowledge: Akhil (2014) showed that one of the major difficulties enterprises encounter in effort of applying lean is not knowledge of specific lean practices, but lack of comprehensive and suitable lean knowledge related to probable problems occuring within the companies. Matt (2013) highlighted two types of barriers involving in lean knowledge, one is knowledge on lean tools and the other is lean education in general. Having the same opinion with the authors, Norani (2010) considered lack of knowledge on lean concepts as a dominating enemy to lean implementation process. Besides, 13 papers out of 30 reviewed research papers indicated that lack of knowledge is a significant barrier on lean transition.
 Resistance to lean:  in addition to lack of knowledge, Herbert et al. (2014) also indicated that any kind of resistance ranging from social to cultural resistance to change will impede the success of lean deployment. Lura and Priti (2011) and his colleague agreed with the authors that avoidance of change is not able to get the final stage of LPS. Smart (2013) stressed even more seriously that resistance is potentially the most dangerous to transformation process of biopharmaceutical manufacturing in the early stage.  When it comes to a specific kind of resistance, Ningombam et al (2013) revealed that the resistance of employees is the reason for the failure of LPS implementation. Another kind of resistance is past experience, which prevents employees to change the old way in processing to a lean approach (Sundareshan et al., 2015). In general, Ana (2010) pointed out that organizational barriers are the main resistance to Lean.  As illustrated by the figure, there are more six papers supporting that resistance to lean is far significantly influencing the journey of lean deployment.
 Lack of training: Alberto and Marco (2007) contributed to the list of lean berries with consideration of insufficient training as a severe lean barrier. Deficiency in lean training is so risky to the success of LPS implementation that 11 research papers out of 30 reviewed papers did report the lack of training as a significant barrier.
Besides, the literature review also revealed that the failure of LPS deployment process is caused by weak leadership, insufficient budget, improper planning for implementation, deficiency in executive resources, employees’ attitude toward LPS and other barriers showed by the bar chart.
Therefore, the success of deploying LPS will depend on how well the implementation of LPS handles these lean barriers.
Lean success factors
In contrast to lean barriers, the process of LPS implementation needs to capture as many success factors as possible. By executing a similar approach to the analysis of lean barriers, lean success factors were analysed and graphed as the following figure:

Figure 6: Lean success factors-Statistics [Own design]
 Leadership management: when it comes to success factors on lean implementation, strong leadership management is found 8 times through scrutinizing 30 chosen research papers. Pius et al., (2006) conducted a comprehensive survey on lean enterprises to figure out the critical success factors on LPS implementation. The research result concluded that the succinct way to implement the concept of lean manufacturing successfully within SMEs, is to harbour strong leadership traits that are capable of exhibiting excellent project management styles. Amit and Sneha (2014) made the same conclusion that the success of LPS highly depends upon several factors but the key factor is the working of the management. 
 Knowledge on lean:  Dr. Shigeo Shingo and Mr. Taiichi Ohno created the backbone of the industrial revolution known as the Just-In-Time system which is one of the most important pillars of lean manufacturing system. Therefore, it is very informative from Shingo (1989) who gave a hint that knowledge on lean will enhance the possibility of the success of LPS deployment process. In addition to automotive industry, Friedli et al. (2006) made as massive quantitative and qualitative study on operational excellence (OPEX) in the pharmaceutical industry on which the authors described LPS is an element of OPEX and lean knowledge is prerequisite to the success. 
  Lean skills, human aspects and cultural change: in conjunction with lean knowledge, lean skills enable lean practitioners within companies to detect and solve the problems as a part of lean implementation process. According to Kumar (2013), those skills are derived from quality of human resources considered as a key success factor. All human aspects, such as employee loyalty (Ahmad et al., 2009), flexible workforce (John, 1988), and quality of human resources (Kumar, et al., 2013), need to be changed to fit lean organizational culture so that the success of lean implementation process can be guaranteed (Pedram, 2011). 
The more success factors listed on the figure are captured by a lean implementation process, the higher probability of LPS implementation success is prominent. The proposal for the lean implementation process tries to account as many success factors as possible so that the implementation of LPS will have higher possibility of success.
As a consistent result of analysis on lean barriers and success factors, leadership, training, and willingness to change are some of critical influencing factors. However, the pSME should not ignore the other found factors impeding the successful deployment of LPS even though the enterprise prepares and executes very well in the planning phase in which strong encouragement from management and training are provided. For example, one of the impeding factors can be a particular situation in which an enterprise that has more than two production sites or products faces a confusion about the lean implementation on all production sites or a chosen one. That could lead to a different result (Wilson, 2010). 
In summary, each situation should be customized and lean implementation process has to be configured to capture the distinct characteristics. When it comes to pSMEs, the configuration of lean implementation process is presented by the following sections.
Development of lean implementation in pharmaceutical SMEs
Bhasin and Burcher (2006) revealed the lack of adequate project sequencing as one of the main problems in lean implementation (as cited by Sherif et al., 2013). In order to avoid the problem, the proposed journey to LPS for pSMEs is divided into several phases broken down with a number of deployment steps and these lead logically the process to the lean targets. As a result, the development of lean implementation for pSMEs is based on 10 critical implementation steps found in the analysis of literature review on section 2.3.2. As described by the following figure, those critical deployment steps are assigned into the appropriate phases, including planning, support system, execution, post execution, and lean sustaining. These phases are integrated with monitoring, controlling and documentation, which ensures that the continuity and success of lean implementation are completely accomplished. 

Figure 7: Proposed implementation phases [Own design]
The proposed phases are configured and structured in a logical comprehensive sequence to guide pSMEs go through the lean journey. Apparently, the pSMEs should be flexible to adapt those phases to their own circumstances. For instance, if the pSME has already struggled on the execution of lean implementation with unsatisfactory results, the pSME should look back to the upstream phases to diagnose which steps the pSMEs have not fulfilled. 
The phases are thoroughly broken down into the 10 sequential critical steps and interpreted by the following sections:
 
Planning phase
This phase is designed to facilitate a pSME to recognize the benefits they get out of LPS from which they can make decision on the implementation. Top management is mainly required to involve in this phase in which the top managers have to act as driving and decisive forces to make the commitment, establish the expert lean teams, participate in planning and aligning general LPS goals with the strategic business goals. By going through this phase summarized by Figure 8, adaptive activities are recommended to compensate the characteristics of the pSME, such as lack of strategic planning, deficiency in vision inspiration and insufficient alignment between its business strategies and lean goals. Flexibly, the pSME is able to skip this phase as long as the following activities are properly fulfilled.
Lean understanding
Before considering the realization of LPS, the pSME’s top management needs to have a deep awareness of lean, what benefits lean can bring into the growth of its business. Like any other industry, the efficient performance in regulated industry including pharmaceuticals, biopharmaceuticals, and medical devices to name just a few is a key measure to the success. Applying lean in the pSME to bring the efficiency by reducing waste, low cost operations, flexibility and responsiveness to the pharmaceutical market. Inside the pharmaceutical operations, there is existence of potential areas in which inefficient operations can be compensated by lean as described by the table below:
Value Added ActivitiesSupporting Activities Chemical biochemical reaction mechanisms
 Product formulation
 Product dispensing: dosage formulation
 Manufacturing operations
 Packaging operations
 Product packaging: bottles, vials, ampules, blister packs, convenience packing
 Labelling
 Laboratory operations
 Facility operations Shipping and distribution
 QC sample retention
 Product stability testing
 Product retention sampling
 Product analysis testing
 Maintenance
 Training
 Quality operations
 Documentation
 Audits
 Raw material delivery and quality control
sampling
 Warehousing
 Raw material preparationTable 7: Pharmaceutical areas for lean implementation [Published by Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2013, as cited by Smart (2013)]







By understanding the tangibility of the results and benefits the pSME may achieve, its confidence and eagerness to LPS implementation can be enhanced, which in turn fosters top management commitment, a critical factor to the success of lean journey. As mentioned by the previous sections, another point worth acknowledging is that the targets of LPS, waste reduction and value creation, are not only compatible with but provide supplements to those of cGMP, product effectiveness and safe.
Apart from the benefits lean can bring to the pSME, the technical cores of lean need also to be comprehended by the top managers, one of which is lean principles. LPS is a comprised universal set of lean principles which could be deployed in industry (Womack and Johns, 1990). This means that lean principles are critical points that the pSME needs to acknowledge and comply with. 
The research revelation on lean methods and tools, critical success factors and barriers facilitates the pSME to get into them in advance so that the applicability of lean practices can be realized, barriers can be avoided and success factors are able to be emphasized during the implementation. By doing that, the contingency plan is made up to avoid unexpected results which impact negatively on the confidence of the pSME in terms of the cost of implementation.  
As concluded by Smart (2013), the real value of LPS in the regulated environment, is how the integrated approach yielding very noticeable benefits through reduction in waste areas is well structured. This proposed lean implementation process (Figure 7) is the one that supports the pSME to succeed in the lean journey by avoiding the lack of methodology that is considered as a factor impeding the lean transformation process.
After acknowledging thoroughly the potential benefits and all elements of LPS, the next step for the top management of the pSME is to evaluate the applicability, benefits and the goals of LPS deployment for its particular enterprise scenario with the help of the established expert lean teams. Those teams initially facilitate the top management to conduct a comprehensive and systematic business assessment and align LPS goals to the strategic goals. 
Expert lean team
It is worth recognizing a noticeable pillar of the house of lean thinking that is human factor playing a decisive role in the success of LPS deployment. Therefore, it is very crucial for the entrepreneur of the pSME to invest time on establishing the expert lean members who have an ultimate responsibility for the successful journey. The lean team should consist of lean experts and senior management personnel from different departments and the team’s main tasks are to plan goals, organize team members and other resources, and schedule and monitor implementation activities. 
It is very recommended for the pSME to hire a qualified consultant whose experience is valuable. The key point is that the lean expert consultant has a set of experienced eyes and lean thinking that makes him stand out from inner workings of the pharmaceutical plants, which enables him to propose objective evaluations and cost saving solutions. Instead of implementation by themselves, the pSME can avoid vicious waste due to a lean implementation process of trial and error by getting the consultant involved in driving the organization towards lean, especially through the early phases of the program (Smart, 2013). 
The senior leader, who is the one in executive management team which has full authority and responsibility to make organizational changes, and the consultant are two most important people in the effort of establishing the expert lean team. The two people are far and away experienced in selecting lean team members who are expected to lead and plan the implementation projects. The lean team members will preferably be multi-functional, and always include quality functional and regulatory personnel, because everything leading to changes will require a quality input or regulatory submission in the strict regulated industry. After the team members are selected, they are assigned into different interacting groups and each group will have an appointed lean team leader dedicated to an assigned implementation subject. The lean team leader needs to be experienced personnel who owns the process and have qualities of a team leader, such as respect for people and sufficient authority to lead his team.
Once the steering team, including the consultant, senior leaders, and lean team leaders, is built, the starting task of the team is to make a comprehensive enterprise evaluation on internal and external business aspects, facilitate the top management of the pSME to align their strategic business goals with lean goals, and sketch the general schedule for lean implementation activities.
Enterprise evaluation
Without assessing and measuring properly the current state of business, improvement activities can not be made and evaluated in a systematic way. In this phase, the role of the lean consultant in cooperation with the team leaders is absolutely critical for the systematic evaluation of the present state. The consultant cooperating with the steering team of the pSME will make a comprehensive evaluation of:
External factors: to avoid a situation in which the pSME falls into the trap of lack of proper strategic planning, the critical external factors must be analysed. For instant, one of the external factors is the market in which the size of the capacity to produce many of the pharmaceutical drugs that were required up to 10,000 L capacity has now been reduced down to 1,000 L and 2,000 L (single use/hybrid design), which is feasible to reduce the batch size in production (Smart, 2013). Besides, the patent expirations have given a favourable condition to the emergence of the cost-effective production of bio-similar products. In addition, political factors have been influencing on pharmaceutical manufacturing as lower-cost drugs and cell/gene therapies, which leads to the increasing need of waste reduction in pharmaceutical operations. The other positive factor relates to regulations that have encouraged pharmaceutical enterprises to innovate and make improvements in pharmaceutical operations since the release of PAT, process analytical technology, of FDA in 2002 (Kansakoski, 2006), which breaks the barriers of resistance in lean thinking. The lean team needs to emphasize the external facts that can influence the success of lean implementation and take them into production strategies while they are developed.
Internal factors:  a series of systematic evaluations of the internal business strengths and weaknesses, and manufacturing system necessitates to be conducted thoroughly with the maximum possibility of success under the help of the consultant. According to Wilson (2010), the consultant has a valuable experience in giving answers to questions like: 
 How strong the top management commitment in lean implementation is
 How well the employees are motivated
 How many internal employees who are capable of participating into the implementation process are and then what level of training they need
 How high levels of stability and quality in both the production processes and products are reached
 What percentage of availability in both machines and manufacturing lines is
 How far the continuous improvement philosophy has been developed 
When it comes to the special characteristics of pharmaceutical production, the evaluation is different from the other industries. The consultant together with the leading teams who are the owners of pharmaceutical processes assess the applicability of LPS in the existing processes with full attention of quality compliance management systems, such as 21 CFR 210/211, 600 series in the US, the ICH document, ICH Q8 (pharmaceutical development), ICH Q9 (risk management), and ICH Q10 (quality systems) (Smart, 2013). Besides, the lean team also considers other special situations in which the pSEM has been applying other production controlling technology specialized in pharmaceutical manufacturing, such as PAT. In fact, PAT really fits well with LPS because many of their targets and core principles are overlapping each other, which can be seen by the following table:
AreaPATLean manufacturingTargets Ensure effectiveness in pharmaceutical manufacturing processes.
 Guarantee end-product quality
 Improve process efficiency Reduce waste
 Create value
 Improve process efficiencyFocus Designing, monitoring and controlling manufacturing through timely measurements.
 Critical quality and performance attributes Value stream analysisApproach to manufacturing Quality balanced with operating efficiency
 Batch-to-batch reproducibility
 Semi-continuous operations
 Risk management Quality balanced with productivity
 Continuous and simultaneousTypical goals Cost reduction because of reduced waste and reduced energy consumption
 Improve yield because of prevention of the scrap, rejects, and reprocessing
 Reduction in the production cycle time by using online/at-line or in-line measurements and control
 Minimize storage space required for work-in-process
 Prevent deviation
 Regulatory relief
 Risk minimization Reduce cost
 Improve quality
 Decrease cycle time
 Reduce inventory
 Improve deliveryTypical tools Statistical tools, such as principle component analysis, partial least squares analysis
 Analytical equipment, such as sensors, optical tools
 Value stream mapping
 Kaizen improvement
 Error proofing
 Moving to pull
 Simple flow
 Training
 Quality function developmentTable 8: A comparison of PAT and LPS [Own design based on Rathore et al. (2010), and Kansakoski et al. (2006)]
Other special pharmaceutical manufacturing attributes are also worth considering thoroughly. One of them is quality of problem solves. According to Smart (2013), having different requirements in terms of workforce qualifications with other process industries, pharmaceutical production requires high qualified people who have a diversified sets of specialized skills, especially in engineering and aseptic fields. Therefore, implementing lean into the pSME requires professional teams specializing in not only lean thinking, but pharmaceutical engineering to avoid the contamination of production lots or regulatory violations. The principle “right first time” is far important in regulated industry.
Another attribute is production equipment that makes pharmaceutical manufacturing difference to other industries. The equipment inherently designed for a batch production of biopharmaceuticals is not for continuous production flows, a typical paradigm of LPS. The approach of batch production in pharmaceutical production will cause several interruption points where quality checks and sign-off accountability are integrated in the primary production procedures to minimize the out-of-compliance citations. However, the lean team can come up with improvement solutions such as batch-size reduction, quick changeover or division of the procedures into processing parallel to reduce production cycle time and enhance productivity.
In summary, any distinct characteristic of pharmaceutical manufacturing systems of the pSMEs should be analysed and configured prior to LPS deployment to avoid quality problems and regulatory violations due to changes. 
Based on the results of the evaluation, the entrepreneur of the pSME ought to be able to define its vision and mission statement leading the formulation adequate business strategic goals by taking market opportunities, alleviating external threads, maximizing utilization of strengths and remediating weaknesses. The next step is to derive general goals of LPS from the strategic goals. The alignment of the goals between LPS and business should be consistent. For example, the top management of the pSME points out that the patent expiration date of its leading biopharmaceutical product will have been coming to an end for the next two years. The scenario leads to the pSME’s strategic goal of maximizing the market share and staying competitive before the bio-similar products are freely penetrating into the market. Therefore, the lean expert team and entrepreneur of the pSME possibly come up with the general lean goal of optimizing production volume of the product through improving proportionally efficiency and simultaneously reducing operational costs. By doing that, the alignment between the goal of LPS and the business strategy can be met. 
Once the general goals of lean are set up, the lean team needs to submit an operational plan of lean implementation to the top management of the pSME. The plan should clearly outline milestones, sequential activities, resources and responsibilities, and timeframes to get the lean goals.
Finally, the top management and stakeholders of the pSME make confirmation to execute the deployment of LPS and allocate resources in terms of budget, lean team members’ working time dedicated to the implementation, and motivate continuously employees during the journey.
Recommendations for planning phase
The following table gives practical recommendations during the planning phase:
DosDon’ts Dedicate sufficient time to understand LPS
 Acknowledge successful major cases in lean implementation derived from the pSME’s own business or outsiders
 Ask for external participations in the implementation, such as a consultant who is experienced in deploying lean in various industries, preferably in pharmaceutical manufacturing
 Maximize the utility of available resources (qualified staff, experience and other skills that staff possess)
 Commit to support the team by scheduling the staff’ working time and empowering them to make certain decisions
 Recognize as many market opportunities (such as new technologies reducing production cycle of a unit operation) and threats, strengths and weaknesses of the enterprise
 Derive lean goals as well KPIs from the enterprise’s strategic goals and match them with SMART (specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and time) principle. Assign fully the LPS implementation for other subordinates, instead of the entrepreneur of the enterprise
 Partial or rare involvement of top management during planning
 Ignore stakeholders
 Reply fully on the consultant who is hired to lead exclusively the team to implement LPS
 Overburden the staff with several changes or tasks at the same period
Table 9: Recommendations on the planning phase [Own design]
Support system
Prior to getting on the way approaching the general goals of lean, a solid support system should be installed so that the information flows move freely from the top to the bottom and vice versa. The implementation of LPS is not only redesigning the production processes, but creating a system in which the information of lean knowledge can be transferred to every member in the organization (Dombrowski, et al., 2012). Therefore, it is very vital for the lean team to establish communication system and conduct training programs transferring lean understanding to participants. The way to design the support system is summarized the following figure and interpreted as below:


Figure 9: Lean implementation process - Support system [Own design]
Communication and feedback system
Manufacturing sequential processes, human interactions and motions, and material flows are only visible parts of LPS. One of the reasons for failure in lean implementation is that the entrepreneur of an enterprise focuses mainly on the moving physical objects instead of integrating the information and physical flows. Hence, the lean team should take proper attention of building the communication and feedback system.  
The first step is to establish the lean organizational structure on which the directions of information can be determined. As described by the following figure, the information should begin with the strategic goals derived from the entrepreneur of the pSME and flow down into the middle and line managers who involve into the implementation scope. It is noticeable that the feedback flows from the operational employees should be encouraged for the reason that they mainly interact with manufacturing processes, which helps them point out the problem background and make up improvement ideas. Moreover, once the feedback flows are appreciated by the entrepreneur, the employee morale and engagement, which are elements of the pillar named “respect for people” in the house of lean thinking, can be fostered.   

Figure 10: Structure of Information flows [Own design]
Not only are the internal flows of information formed, but an announcement of major changes due to the implementation to suppliers and customers needs to be deployed. Linking to the previous example, the forecast of increasing demand in pharmaceutical ingredients used to produce the leading biopharmaceutical product of the pSME ought to be conveyed to the relevant pharmaceutical suppliers. The shortage of input for the general goal of lean - optimizing production volume - can be avoided. The marketing teams of the pSME also need to be informed that information so that they can prepare for releasing future marketing campaigns to customers.
The lean team not only establishes the system of communication and feedback, but functions as a coordinator who is a catalyst for lean discussion among participants as well as departments, facilitates any participants to communicate freely, and organizes the training programs. 


Training program
As a result of the literature review on lean influencing factors, training is one of the most important success factors and consistently the lack of training is the most dangerous one to the success of lean implementation. With the help of the consultant, the training programs can properly be organized in a way that training time for the staff and management who will coordinate the program is efficient.  
Normally, the training program gets started with a formal introduction in which the change to implement the concept of lean manufacturing is a core content. The management participants who are not immersed directly in the lean team, but involve in the change should be trained with emphasis on basic “5 Why” questions- What, Why, Who, Where, When- such as referring to the house of lean thinking as “What” and benefits of lean as “Why”. The program should guarantee that the management group gets properly lean understanding in terms of not only tools and principles, but underlying philosophy.  When it comes to specific skills training, the key staff and people identified as trainers or main lean practitioners will be the key participants of this training session. The session mainly focuses on technical parts of lean, such as problem-solving tools and principles, and at the same time introduces the lean implementation plan that is created in the previous step.	
All the trained key lean members including managers and lean team leader are responsible for the transfer of acquired knowledge to other relevant employees. By doing that way called cascade training (Rafi, 2010), the pSME can save training costs, spread skills and knowledge quickly and widely, and importantly enhance the expertise and confidence of the employees. 
However, it is very advisable to avoid either the massive training of all employees who consume the training resources, but rarely apply them or providing training too early or lately (Wilson, 2010). Furthermore, the training contents should be concrete and JIT-right content, right people, right time, right place. For instance, the right content refers to the appropriate tools that are suitable for the pSME, such as 5S housekeeping and total productive maintenance that require minor amount of time and specialized knowledge. 
Once every lean member knows the general goals of lean, the operational plan of the implementation and has basic knowledge of lean tools and principles, the next step is to execute lean projects to achieve the goals.
Recommendations on building the support system
There are some notes while the pSME establishes the organization and communication system for the program as following:
DosDon’ts Engage affected persons by actively informing the program
 Ensure two directional communications, both positive and negative feedback.
 Identify and inform the external affected organizations, such as suppliers and retailers
 Convey the lean goals clearly and transparently to involved staff
 Conduct training programs for general techniques (such as 5S or TPM) and specific skills on required situations (such as design to experiment) Avoid negative feedback flows
 Assign tasks without informing targets or KPIs.
 Deploy large-scale training sessions
 Ignore participations/supports of IT and other affected departments


Table 10: Recommendations on building the support system [Own design]
Execution
As the previous steps of implementation preparation are completed, selecting and deploying improvement projects in which several combinational kaizen practices are properly applied in solving certain problems play a decisive role of the success of the program. During this phase, the pSME will probably face many difficulties in configuring LPS to distinct characteristics of not only pharmaceutical manufacturing but also their own scenarios. The following parts, which are summarized by Figure 11, are inherently designed to facilitate the pSME to overcome the issues.
Improvement projects
The normal way to configure LPS to pharmaceutical manufacturing processes is value stream mapping (Smart, 2013). The formation of the value stream map for the pSME’s manufacturing system is one of the comprehensive approach necessitated to have a fundamental view of holistic potential improvements of the system based on the lean initiatives. Usually, the pSME has one or more than one value streams of multiple product portfolios or even multiple manufacturing factories that is (are) specialized in serving a group(s) of customers. Hence, that leads to the situation in which the pSME needs to choose a pilot value stream or manufacturing line for the following reasons: 
Lack of resources: The pSME is normally lack of financial and human resources to make a large-scale lean implementation on their value streams.
Lack of experience: Not only is the pSME also lack of experience, but the initial learning curve is very steep, hence many unexpected results can occur during the implementation. No matter how well the pSME plans even with the help of the consultant, the contingency plans are not able to cover all unexpected events.
Inconsistent effects: It is safe to say that each value stream has different characteristics, for example processes, machines, and qualification of operators, to name just a few. Therefore, a certain method can be useful in solving a problem on a value steam named “A”, but the same method can lead to failure in dealing with the similar problem on the other value stream named “B”.


Figure 11: Lean implementation process - Execution phase [Own design]

Therefore, the pSME should carefully select a pilot value stream or manufacturing line for the implementation at a time (Wilson, 2010). In order to choose the pilot value stream, the systematic analysis of lean implementation influencers, which include mainly customer demand, product features associated with manufacturing processes, needs to be carried out in advance, preferably during the Enterprise Evaluation phase:
Customer demand: having mentioned that, when the pSME has multiple pharmaceutical product families to meet different groups of customers, only one of which should be considered for the implementation. Several criteria for selecting the product family include similar routings, similar processing times, and customers with similar needs and demand rates (Mike, R., and John, S., 1999). However, the rule can be flexible by the fact that the entrepreneur of the pSME can flexibly select a single manufacturing process that produces a strategic pharmaceutical product, such as an active pharmaceutical ingredient, to meet the demand of core customers.
Product characteristics: in addition to customer demand, the product characteristics need also to be taken into account. When it comes to pharmaceutical industry in general, its product characteristics can be classified into large molecule and small molecule drugs in terms of molecular weight, structural complexity. They differ not only in terms of size, but also in how they are made in different manufacturing processes (Small and large molecules, 2016). Due to these differences, it is very important for the pSME to acknowledge that the application of the continuous manufacturing concept can reduce biopharmaceutical manufacturing time (Eric and Ronald, n.d), especially for small molecule drugs. In contrast, the large bio-products can get more benefits from the uninterrupted production flow in terms of quality by keeping nutrients ongoing and avoiding deviations that reduce cell viability than reducing cycle time (Deloitte, 2015). Apparently, the small molecules have more flexibility than large ones.
Manufacturing processes: needless to say, analysing manufacturing processes is far important when the pSME considers the implementation of LPS. What kind of the pharmaceutical product and its characteristics the pSME produces will decide the manufacturing process. Generally, there are two pharmaceutical production processes including bioprocessing and chemical synthesis. The main difference between them is raw materials used to produce these drugs (Small and large molecules, 2016). Living organisms such as bacteria, yeast and mammalian cells are used in the bioprocessing whereas a series of chemical synthesis is used in the traditional pharmaceutical processing. In the era of advanced technology, both of them can fit with the concept of continuous manufacturing that can bring different performance advantages to the pharmaceutical processes. As can be seen by the following figure, small pharmaceutical molecules typically get more benefits in the reduction of production time than the improvement of quality and vice versa for large molecules. In general, both of them representing both different manufacturing processes can have smaller production batch size and less offline quality control with the concept of continuous manufacturing than traditional batch manufacturing.

Figure 12: Continuous manufacturing on pharmaceutical production [Own design based on Deloitte (2015) and World Health Organization (2011)]
By analysing these input factors, the lean team can enable the top management of the pSME to select the right value stream which is not only critical, but also avoid the possible deviations from satisfying the strategic goals that the pSME sets up beforehand.
Once the pilot value stream is properly selected, the next step is to create the value stream map for the pSME’s chosen pilot manufacturing line. This is one of graphical and quantitative prominent approach revealing full potential improvement opportunities. Value stream mapping enables the lean team to map out all the pharmaceutical manufacturing processes in the line, their interactions and especially performance parameters. Its general structure and parameters measuring performances of each unit operation can be described as the following figure:

Figure 13: Example of value stream mapping format [Own design]
The experienced consultant, who not only masters in this tool but also has special eyes on pharmaceutical manufacturing that requires attention to the complexities of regulatory compliance, plays a very useful role in leading the lean team of the pSME to build the VSM in form of both current state and future state. According to Smart (2013), the lean team members who involve in building the VSM should include:
The process manager: who is responsible for the production of the pharmaceutical product for the manufacturing line.
The process engineers: who have specialized knowledge of understanding the pharmaceutical manufacturing processes to be capable of reengineering and making necessary improvements.
The operational staff: who are familiar with daily production operations in the line
Quality control and quality assurance staff: who are able to fully integrate the regulatory compliance requirements with new changes in the process and ensure the compliance is met.
The other members: those who in IT department assure accurate and in-time required data for the project. Beside, financial staff are also supportive in estimating the budget and converting stuff in terms of monetary measures.
The first value stream is the current state of the VSM (cVSM) showing the graphical representation of present operational performances and at the same time visualizing waste of:
Muda: any activity or process that does not add value under customers’ point of view. This includes any form of transportation, inventory, excessive motion, waiting time, scrap, rework, and excessive production. Overproduction is the most dangerous one which causes the other wastes. 
Mura: the waste of unevenness or imbalance among processing activities. This is the cause of many of seven wastes. 
Muri: unnecessary stress or non-value added tasks burdening operators and processes.  
The cVSM is also the starting point of further analysis to make improvements. In contrast, the future state of the VSM describes a desirable picture of the future performance of the manufacturing line after eliminating the wastes. It also represents for the target of the pSME wants to approach. Bridging the gap between the current and future state of VSM is the main success of the lean implementation program. To continue the above example, the expert lean team builds the current VSM of the pilot value stream line which shows three major wastes affecting the productivity or output of the line. The first one in the category of muda waste could be contamination issues due to bioreactor seal failures which cost downtime for fixing the quality problem and eventually reduce the first-right-quality output rate. The mura waste could be too much variation in cycle time among the bio-manufacturing processes definitely leading to high WIP inventory measured in average stock cover of 17 days of the demand, which in turn not only prolongs production throughput time but requires additional unnecessary resources to monitor it. The final one is muri waste which could be occurred during the pharmaceutical production documentation or batch records requiring 1,000 data entries, but 50% of which are double or more checks not required by the regulatory authorities, which puts senseless hardworking on employees and inevitably prolongs the release time of batch records. Once these wastes are identified, the lean team estimates quantitatively the potential improvement by sketching the future VSM showing the gap needs to be narrowed.
The gap can be measured by one or more sub-goals that need to be aligned with the general goals of LPS set up during the “Enterprise Evaluation” phase. It is so important to highlight again that the alignment between the lean sub-goals and general goals of LPS as well as the strategic goals needs to be consistent otherwise the chain of efforts is waste due to missing links to the business strategies, which is concluded as a lean barrier in the analysis of literature. 
Continuing with the previous example a series of sub-goals to support a lean general goal - optimizing the product volume on the pilot manufacturing line which produces the leading biopharmaceutical product of the pSME – would include:
Reduction in downtime and quality problems for manufacturing the product A by preventing the contamination issues
Reduction in the WIP inventory by reducing variation in production cycle time among processes.
Streamlining the process of pharmaceutical production documentation by reducing non-value added activities (e.g duplicate quality checks that are not required by the regulatory requirements) by eliminating unnecessary checks on batch records
Breaking the aligned sub-goals down by appropriate lean assessment indicators or key performance indicators (KPIs) is necessary for monitoring and assessing the progress of the implementation. The KPIs derived from the sub-goals and chosen for the pharmaceutical manufacturing process quantify numerically the level of process performance at a given period and at the same time they are assignable for those who have responsibilities of the process. The KPIs for the pharmaceutical manufacturing process can be exemplified as below:
Cycle time target for the process
Overall Equipment Effectiveness( e.g OEE for bioreactors)
Percentage of right first time of actions, unit operations, laboratory analysis
Productivity per unit time: for unit processes or entire process
Unit labour per batch produced
Yield factors; conversion factor for raw materials (chemical, intermediates, or bio-substances) into products (drugs)Table 11: List of key performance indicators [Smart, 2013]
After having sub-goals of LPS, and KPIs for the pilot manufacturing line, the next challenging step for the lean team is to identify pilot lean improvement projects within the scope of the manufacturing line. Choosing pilot improvement projects not only bases on the KPIs, but replies on several factors which can influence the success of pilot projects. Normally, there are five factors the lean team of the pSME should care for to choose a pilot project which has high possibility to succeed as described by the following figure:

Figure 14: Factors for choosing a pilot project [Own design based on Mike (2009)]
People: The qualification of the employees who involve in the pilot project will play a decisive role in the success of the implementation. The lean team with the help of the consultant needs to survey the existing specialized knowledge of the employees and train them as needed.
Management engagement: Getting management team, who has sufficient willing time and inclination to cooperate and support the team, involved in the project is another factor to the success of the project. 
Timeframe: The pilot project should be neither too short nor too long. Short-time projects do not catch up a meaningful attention from organization whereas long-time projects will normally consume a lot of resources, which is not a favourable choice for the pSME. It is advisable that a three- or six-month project is typically sufficient.
Size: The scope of the project should not be too large. It needs to focus on one subject at a time, such as improving productivity in an unit operation of packaging drugs.
Importance:  the more importance the pilot project is, the larger the management engagement and employees’ attention are. Therefore, an unimportant project will not get necessary attention from the rest of the organization, which in turn leads unintentionally employees not to do all tasks that require them to do.
By considering these factors altogether, the pSME is able to choose the pilot lean implementation project which is highly potential to succeed and thereby increase the confidence and learning curve of those who involve in the project. The chosen pilot project should be documented as a project chapter which shows an overview of the project, its goals, and key lean teams as exemplified in the simple version of the previous examples as the following figure:
1st Pilot Project ChapterTitleLean pharmaceutical manufacturing lineStrategy goalMaximizing market share of bio-product ALean goalOptimizing productivity and decreasing the throughput time of bio-product A on its manufacturing process without reduction in the in-line and final quality and regulatory violations.Lean sub-goals LSG-1: Reduction in downtime for manufacturing the product A by preventing the contamination issues
 LSG-2: Reduction in the WIP inventory by narrowing variation in production cycle time among processes.
 LSG-3: Streamlining the production documentation process by reducing non-valued added activities by eliminating unnecessary checks on batch recordsSuccess metrics/KPIsLean sub-goalsBase lineTargetLSG-13 hours/day1.5 hours/dayLSG-217 days of stock cover5 days of stock coverLSG-335 quality check pointsMinimumProject team leaderMohamadConsultant representativeAlexanderManufacturing line managerPoliteleTable 12: Example of a pilot project chapter [Own design]
Once the pilot project associated with the KPIs is identified, the expert lean team needs to choose appropriate lean principles that make positive changes in the manufacturing line and then achieve the KPIs. As a review of the literature on lean principles and practices (section 2.2), Table 5 enables the lean team to connect lean principles with lean practices that are likely applicable in the environment of pSMEs and align them with the KPIs which are normally in form of quality, time and cost. The alignment among KPIs, lean principles and lean practices can be exemplified as the table below:

KPIsLean principlesLean practicesReduction in downtime for manufacturing the product AVisual managementAndon
Shop floor managementAvoidance of wasteWaste analysis
Total productive maintenanceStreamlining the process by reducing non-valued added activitiesStandardization5S
Process standardizationReduction in the WIP inventoryPull principleJust in time
Kanban
SupermarketFlow principleU layout
One piece flow
Quick changeoverTable 13: Example of alignment among KPIs, lean principles and practices [Own design]
By doing that, the lean team is able to succeed in seeking the consistence among business strategy, lean general and sub-goals, KPIs, lean principles and lean practices. The consistence will enable the pSME to avoid insufficient planning and missing links to its business strategies. To recap, Figure 15 summarizes the step-by-step sequential approach for choosing properly lean principles associated with lean practices under consideration of consistent alignment between the pSME’s business goals and LPS goals, which is exemplified by the orange objects.
Now, it is time for the lean team to dive into the execution of the pilot project.
Kaizen practices
Missing application of lean tools is considered as a dangerous lean barrier which impedes the completion of solving a problem. There are many available lean tools, reaching 101 lean manufacturing tools and metrics (Pavnaskar et al., 2013), which makes the problem more complicated to choose the best lean tools or combination of them for dealing with the problem. However, by following the proposed systematic lean implementation process, the pSME is able to narrow down a bundle of lean tools into one or some potential lean tools for problem solving as described by the following figure:

Figure 15: Step-by-step consistent approach for lean implementation projects [Own design]

Linking to the previous example, some appropriate tools for solving the muda waste -bioreactor seal leaks causing contamination issues increasing downtime and quality problems - could be Ishikawa diagram for figuring out a root cause, worker-self check for daily checking, and total productive maintenance for autonomous maintenance of the bioreactor.  By doing those analyses, the bioreactor leaks can be detected prior to massive problems occurred. Continuously, An useful lean tool in dealing with the muri waste - unnecessary double or triple checks on batch record reviews not required by the regulatory authorities - could be step-by-step process mapping enabling the lean team to understand the process of batch record review and thereby indicate the non-value added activities (NVA). As long as the lean team and involved staff, especially QA/AC staff, who are responsible for the process, realize these non-value added tasks, the lean team is able to reengineer and standardize the process by getting rid of those NVA tasks. Additionally, if the pSME is able to apply a technology or methodology on the market recognized during the phase of Enterprise Evaluation, such as an electronic record, the batch record processes are lean in a way that the record is made which only allows one directional progress to be done as long as accurate data is imported into the system. In addition to the electronic approach, another approach using GAMP5 (Good Automated Manufacturing Practices 5) methodology enables the pSME to satisfy the regulatory requirements for computerized systems enhancing the efficiency and effective of production systems (Smart, 2013). 
It is quite common that the team members could need the on-job training on chosen kaizen practices from the expert lean team so that they can learn by doing, which is also an element of lean philosophy. Having stressed that it is not right to say that every lean tool the pSME can apply in every its own situation, some of tools require a lot of efforts and expertise in engineering the process whereas some of them can be applied to create immediate results, such as 5S or autonomous maintenance. The list of kaizen practices suitable for the pSME can be referred back to Table 5. 
It is also vital to rehearse the importance of integrating QC testing and laboratories in any changes. The QA/QC members who involve in the implementation should be fully responsible for checking the changes to see whether these improvement changes can violate the regulations. In order to make a full realization of the lean approach in a pharmaceutical environment, the production processes must be fully coordinated with QA/QC testing procedures. It is also very worth cooperating with regulatory authorities in making major adjustments relating to reengineer the pharmaceutical manufacturing line. Linking to the mura waste - too much variation in cycle time among the bio - manufacturing processes definitely leading to high WIP inventory measured in average stock cover of 17 days of the demand - mentioned in the previous part, the solution for it could reengineer the QC laboratory and production facilities with the designed capacity of production balanced to demand rate. The first step is to acknowledge the Talk time (net production time after taking all inefficient time out of account divided by production demand in a given period). Based on the Talk time, the processes are balanced in a popular form of a cell manufacturing coordinated with the concept of pull production, Kanban and Andon systems in integration of QA and QC procedures, which can be exemplified by the following figure:

Figure 16: Example of pharmaceutical U-Shape simple process [Own design based on Friedli (2006) and Smart (2013)]
As mentioned previously, all implementation steps should be monitored, controlled and documented and the practice of lean tools on the pilot project is not an exception. It is very common to use Gantt chart to show all kaizen activities, which updates frequently the progress of the project to the lean team and stakeholders. The next step is to evaluate the results of kaizen activities.
Recommendations on the execution phase
It is hard to avoid all unexpected results, but the following recommendations can alleviate the contingencies: 
DosDon’ts Ask for full participation of QA/QC staff who have a specialized knowledge on regulatory compliances
 Build project management boards for tracking the progress 
 Publish and inform kaizen activities in a form of Gantt-chart-similar models
 Let the team involve fully in the project with the support of the consultant
 Focus on one project at the same time Choose a project which is too ambitious to implement due to time frame and resources needed
 Make decisions on change with full concentration on operational targets or monetary objectives, but have attention on social aspects (respect for people)
 Deploy simultaneously many lean implementation projects
 Make up KPIs not connected with the business goalsTable 14: Recommendations on the execution phase [Own design]
Post execution
The whole phase is interpreted as the following:


Figure 17: Lean implementation process - Post execution phase [Own design]

Having mentioned that the implementation of LPS is a journey, the pSME needs to have a comprehensive measurement system to track the progress of movement approaching LPS. Not only is the progress necessary to be captured, but the learning curve obtained during lean deployment is also indispensable to be documented and standardized to ensure that sustainable successes are maintained for the long run. 
Performance measurement system
The success of the implementation replies on the abilities and readiness of the lean team members for constructing a performance measurement system. The expert lean team should design the measurement system that is readable and transparent to all employees regardless of their qualification level. The KPIs typically constituting the measurement system need to be numerically presented in visualized forms so that the readers can grasp the progress in a convenient way.
It is known that the KPIs must be aligned with the strategic goals on the top of the hierarchy and lean goals on its lower braches. However, there are some essential inherent production KPIs that pSME can adapt to measure the progress of continuous improvement in pharmaceutical manufacturing performance as follow:
Availability: the ratio of net working time to planned overall time in a given period. This KPI is designed to quantity the inefficient time, such as unplanned downtime, machine failures and unplanned maintenance. Those failures should be minimized as much as possible. To exemplify it, a (fictional) pharmaceutical manufacturer operates 24 hours/day but its total break time between shifts is 4 hours/day and average inefficient time (downtime, unplanned equipment maintenance, to name just a few) is around 1.5 hours/day, which means that the availability of the plant is nearly 77% as below:
Availability=(Net working time)/(Planned time)=(Planned time-break time-ineffient time)/(Planned time)=77%
Performance: the ratio of actual production volume to the planned one in a given period. The purpose is to see how much deviations are and thereby raise a need for figuring out problems, such as unusual rate of employee absenteeism, materials shortages.
Performance=(Actual production volume)/(Planned produced volume)(%)
Quality: the ratio of the qualified production quantity to the actual produced quantity in a given period. This factor shows the level of effectiveness of the system. 
Quality=(Qualified production volume)/(Actual produced volume)(%)
Overall Equipment Effectiveness-OEE: a product of the Availability, Performance, and Quality indicators showing the efficiency and effectiveness of individual work cell or entire production plant in a given period.
OEE=Availability×Performance×Quality (%)
Right First Time-RFT: a ratio of qualified produced quantity, which satisfies quality requirements without corrections, rejects and complaints during the entire subsequent production processes, to the total actual produced quantity in a given period.
RFT=(Quality produced quantity without errors)/(Actual produced volume)  (%)
Stock Cover: a ratio of WIP/inventory quantity to customer demand in a given product. It shows how many days the stock of WIP, finished products, or raw materials can cover the customer demand in a given product
Stock Cover=(Quantity in Stock)/(Customer demand)  (days)
To recap, a series of KPIs set up for the manufacturing line needs to be structured to form the performance measurement system in a simple and transparent format so that every member can track the progress of the lean project and thereby proper decisions can be made to respond possible deviations in the progress. The measurement system can be exemplified as a dashboard below:

Figure 18: Example of performance measurement system [Own design]

Lean documentation and standardization
After employing lean practices and then evaluating the satisfactory level of KPIs accomplishment discussed in the previous parts, it is very worth documenting all lessons including successes and failures, experiences and best kaizen practices during the implementation. By doing so, the pSME can build the system of knowledge and lean stories, which in turn shapes intentionally the culture of the enterprise toward Lean. One way to build such system is that the lean methods and tools leading to the positive changes of operations or procedures are adapted and standardized as official documents used by the pSME. Another necessary way is to integrate lean principles, methods and tools with existing compliance legislation and then create a new compliance methodology enabling the pSME to ensure that the pharmaceutical process will take advantages of all efficient and effective features derived from the new compliance mechanism. As a result, the change can be accomplished in a sequentially and timely manner that will result in both cost effective and efficient ways contributing into the business goals of the pSME.
To rehearse, one of the most crucial lean principles is continuous improvement that is ongoing effort to foster the sustainable growth of the enterprise. Hence, the lean team also needs to document, improve and realign the KPIs with the business goals but on a higher level than the previous one. The reason for setting up ongoing targets is to break down the big one into smaller ones that can satisfy the SMART principle and gradually approach the culture of continuous improvement as described by the following figure:

Figure 19: Example of ongoing targets [Own design]

As mentioned in the previous parts, communication is an indispensable part in the success of lean implementation and it is only effective when the results as well as the progress of the execution are not only documented but visually published to every involved staff.  Meeting boards or visual cues are very useful means for visualizing the information and they can be located in the production areas where everyone can see. Last but not least, the satisfactory level of top management after executing the implementation should be confirmed so that the support and commitment continuity could be made or corrective actions could be taken.
Recommendations on the post-execution phase
The table below just gives some notes the pSME should do and not do during this phase:
DosDon’ts Analysis and documentation of 5xWhy on both the success and failure of the implementation
 Document the pSME’s own implementation cases and internal production principles, methods and tools
 Standardize and document changed operations and procedures with signature of process owners
 Visualize and publish both negative and positive status of the progress Ignore people-oriented evaluation, such as ergonomics when changing decisions take place
 Take other projects before the project has been total completedTable 15:  Recommendations on the post-execution phase [Own design]
Lean sustaining
Ongoing support from the top management of the enterprise plays a very significant role in the success of lean implementation and the support can only be maintained as the result is satisfactory. The lean team should show an objective report of the implementation to indicate what KPIs are satisfied and not achieved in attachment of cause-and-effect analysis. Based on the report, the entrepreneur of the enterprise can make decision on whether they continues to support or take remedy actions on the deployment of LPS.  After the implementation, it should create a favourable environment of motivating operative employees and alleviate the resistance to change. It is also advisable to make up the recognition policy in form of monetary or non-monetary incentives for motivating the employees. Specially, the non-monetary incentives, such as promotion and personal development incentive by training or workshop participation, are very suitable in the pSME due to financial constraints, but they are very powerful in nurturing employee-self motivation and shaping its ongoing learning culture. According to Monica and Jamie (2006), celebrating collectively the success of the implementation is also necessary to be organized and it is also a key variable predicting perception of successful lean implementation.


In conclusion, the lean implementation is an endless journey where the first project is completed and the new next one is made up to expand the implementation scope based on best-practice experience gained from the previous one, which pushes the enterprise to pursue the perfection of efficiency and effectiveness. Lean sustaining is far important in lean philosophy, so the pSME should seriously pursue and maintain the benefits the project gained. The following recommendations facilitate the enterprise to sustain the implementation: 
DosDon’ts Discuss the subordinates’ role in the lean implementation project to enhance their motivation and have proper decisions in terms of incentive policies.
 Motivation based on training, promotion and ongoing learning culture.
 Celebrate properly the success
 Start new projects with benchmarking and exchange best practices with the previous one.  Overemphasize monetary incentives
 Believe financial incentives can replace employee engagement and supportTable 16:  Recommendations on the phase of lean sustaining [Own design]


Conclusion
The research objectives were set out to get the most out of the body of knowledge on LPS to acknowledge the applicability of LPS in the environment of pSMEs, pinpoint the critical success factors and barriers impeding the path approaching LPS of the enterprises, and propose a company-specific lean implementation process alongside guidelines facilitating them to integrate LPS. Firstly, scrutinizing the literature review in terms of the relationship between LPS and cGMP where pSMEs operate shows they are a complementary partnership together enabling the enterprises to achieve efficiency and effectiveness in operations.  Secondly, the research mining on the lean influencing factors reveals the possible success and impeding factors and how frequently they were stressed by the literature, which gives a useful hint for pSMEs for lean thinking and implementation preparation. Noticeably, lean knowledge and training, and leadership factors are far more vital for pSMEs to take them in a careful consideration.
The third main contribution is a literature-based approach in which the proposal of lean implementation gets the most out of available research papers in terms of indispensable implementation steps and compensates the limitations of existing lean deployment models. Smart (2013) provided a deep understanding of LPS in the biopharmaceutical environment; however, the structural and sequential implementation approach were absent. Similarly, having based on the platform of LPS, Friedli (2006) proposed an OPEX reference model concealing the detailed structural approach applied in pharmaceutical industry. The weaknesses of the available models are overcome by identifying the 10 critical implementation steps among the models, structuring and configuring them in a sequential and structural way of five phases driving pSMEs from the lean implementation planning phase toward the completion step. The first phase mainly engages the entrepreneur of the enterprises who will get an overview of LPS and decide to conduct the assessment of LPS applicability. In contrast, the remaining four phases ask full participation of operational managers, staff and favourably the consultant to plan and implement kaizen projects propelling the organization to lean. Going through the phases, the pSMEs are given configuration activities that fit their characteristics with respect to SMEs and pharmaceutical industry, and recommendations the pSMEs should do or not do.
As a nature of the literature-based research methodology, the proposal of the lean implementation process needs to be practically validated. The future research is recommended to test quantitatively the universal applicability of the process in pSMEs.